
[Illustration:

                               Hawaii
                         "The loveliest fleet
                           of islands that
                          lies anchored in
                            any ocean."

                                     Mark Twain
]

                              Paradise Park

                             [Illustration]


                         OAHU Traveler's Guide

                        Bill and Diana Gleasner




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


     4. The Bus

     6. Hawaiian Words and Phrases

     8. Honolulu Highlights

    16. Waikiki

    22. Oahu's East End (Koko Head, Sea Life Park)

    25. Oahu's Windward Coast (Nuuanu Pali Lookout, Polynesian Cultural
        Center)

    30. Oahu's North Shore (Sunset Beach, Waimea Falls Park)

    31. Central Oahu (Schofield Barracks, Wahiawa)

    32. Beachcombing

    33. Hawaiian Fruits

    34. Hawaiian Flowers

    39. Surfing

    40. Swimming Beaches

    41. Body Surfing and Snorkeling Beaches

    42. Glass Float Beachcombing

    43. Fishing

    44. Fun for Kids

    47. Tennis

    48. Golf

    49. Camping

    50. Hiking

    51. Weather

    52. Oahu's Past

    53. Sugar and Pineapple

    54. Pineapple

    56. Map of Oahu

    58. Detail Map of Waikiki

    60. Detail Map of Honolulu

    62. Detail Maps of Oahu's North Shore and East End

    63. Detail Map of Windward Oahu

    64. Detail Map of Oahu's Waianae Coast

    65. Detail Map of Central Oahu


                        The Oriental Publishing Company
                          P. O. Box 22162
                          Honolulu, Hawaii 96822


        Printed by China Color Printing Co., Inc.
        6th Fl., No. 60, Po Ai Road
        Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.


                     [Illustration: Paradise Park]




                                THE BUS


The Bus is definitely the best bargain on Oahu. For 25¢ you can go just
about anywhere including around the island. School age children ride for
10¢.

If you'd like to take the four hour trip around Oahu, board the #8 bus
to Ala Moana Center requesting a transfer to Kaneohe/Wahiawa (#52) or
Wahiawa/Kaneohe (#52). They both circle the island but in different
directions. If you stay on the same bus for the entire trip, you'll have
to pay another 25¢ at Ala Moana for the #8 bus which takes you back to
Waikiki. Should you get off during your trip and board another bus,
request a transfer to use at the Ala Moana Center.

=Remember=:

    Take exact change. Drivers cannot make change.

    Luggage and large parcels are not allowed on the bus.

    Waikiki buses are often full, but don't fret. They run every
        three minutes.

    Most of the buses you will take from Waikiki downtown (toward
        Honolulu or Ala Moana Shopping Center) should be boarded on
        Kuhio Ave.

    If you need a transfer, ask for one when you board the bus, not
        when you exit.

                       =Geographical Directions=

    Makai--toward the ocean

    Mauka--toward the mountains

    Diamond Head--toward the end of the island crowned by Diamond
        Head

    Ewa--the opposite direction from Diamond Head

For information about routes, times, regulations or sightseeing
destinations, call 531-1611 any time between 5:30 a.m. and 10 p.m.

               [Illustration: Honolulu and Diamond Head]

                  [Illustration: King's Alley Waikiki]




                       HAWAIIAN WORDS AND PHRASES


    alii--old royalty of Hawaii

    aloha--hello, farewell, love

    da kine--means whatever you want it to, generally a positive remark

    hale--house

    hana--work

    haole--Caucasian

    heiau--ancient temple

    holoku--formal dress with train

    kai--sea

    kamaaina--a person who was born in the islands or who has lived here
    a long time

    kane--man

    kapu--forbidden, keep out

    kaukau--food

    keiki--child

    kokua--help

    kona--south

    lanai--porch

    laulau--pork or beef cooked in ti leaves

    luau--feast

    mahalo--thank you

    makai--toward the sea

    malihini--stranger

    mauka--toward the mountains

    muumuu--loose dress

    ono--delicious

    opu--stomach

    pali--cliff

    pau--done

    pua--flower

    poi--crushed taro root

    puka--hole

    pupu--hors d'oeuvres

    wahine--female

    wikiwiki--hurry

                             [Illustration]

            [Illustration: King Kamehameha Statue, Honolulu]




                          HONOLULU HIGHLIGHTS


  =King Kamehameha Statue=--King Street in front of Judiciary Building
      and across from Iolani Palace. Impressive bronze statue of
      Kamehameha the Great. Draped with forty foot flower leis on June
      11, Kamehameha Day.

  =Iolani Palace=--King and Richards Street. The only royal palace on
      American soil. Queen Liliuokalani spent nine months here under
      house arrest after her unsuccessful attempt to restore the
      overthrown monarchy in 1893. (Wed.-Sat., 9-2:15, Reservations.)

  =Iolani Barracks, Archives of Hawaii and Bandstand=--All on palace
      grounds. Free concert Friday noon by the Royal Hawaiian Band.

  =State Capitol Building=--Mauka of Iolani Palace (toward the
      mountains). Magnificent architectural achievement with
      volcano-shaped crown and roof opening allowing tropical rain to
      fall on main level five floors below. Works of art in and near
      the courtyard.

  =Hawaii State Library=--478 South King Street. Art exhibits in open
      air patio. Excellent Hawaiian-Pacific room.

  =Honolulu Hale= (City Hall)--King and Punchbowl Streets.

  =Mission Homes=--553 S. King Street. Three 19th century buildings
      provide insight into missionary's lives. Hawaii's oldest frame
      house built from pre-cut lumber brought around Cape Horn in
      1820. (Tues.-Sun. 9-4, fee.)

  =Kawaiahao Church=--947 Punchbowl Street. Oldest church in Honolulu
      with tall, feathered Kahilis at altar. Hawaiian-English service
      every Sunday at 10:30.

  =Honolulu Academy of Arts=--Corner of Ward and Beretania. The best
      of Eastern an and Western art in one of the most beautiful art
      museums in the world. Series of exhibition galleries open onto
      garden courtyards. (10-4:30 except Monday, Sun. 2-5, free)

  =Honolulu International Center=--Between Kapiolani and King Streets
      near Ward. Sports arena, concert hall, convention-theatre
      complex. Fascinating architecture complete with carp-filled
      moat. Always something going on whether it be a Japanese circus
      or a Broadway show.

  =Aloha Tower=--At pier 9 on the waterfront. Excellent views of city
      and harbor. (8-9)

  =Falls of Clyde=--Pier 5 on the waterfront. Ninety-five year old
      full-rigged, four masted ship has been made into a floating
      maritime museum. Only ship of its kind left in the world. Nearby
      is the Oceania, a floating Chinese restaurant which was towed
      all the way from Hong Kong.

  =Chinatown=--Interesting Chinese businesses from herb shops to
      acupuncture clinics. The Tuesday morning tour is recommended.
      Leaves at 9:30 from the Chinese Chamber of Commerce at 42 N.
      King Street. (fee) Ends with Chinese luncheon at Wo Fat's.
      (optional)

  =The Cultural Plaza=--Beretania and Maunakea Sts. A distinctly
      Hawaiian-Oriental center with multi-ethnic entertainment,
      exhibits and shops. (Daily 9:30-5.)

  =Royal Mausoleum=--2261 Nuuanu Ave. Three acres of sacred grounds
      containing chapel and crypts of Hawaiian royalty. (Mon.-Fri., 8-4,
      Sat., 8-12, free.)

  =Kwan Yin Temple=--Vineyard Blvd. near Nuuanu. An intimate look at
      Eastern religion.

  =Foster Botanic Garden=--180 Vineyard St. next to Kwan Yin Temple.
      Exotic trees and plants comprise a 20 acre tropical oasis of
      tranquility. Free self-guiding brochure at entrance. (9-4)

  =National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific=--Puowaina Dr. In the
      extinct volcano known as Punchbowl Crater are 20,000 American
      serviceman who gave their lives in World War II and the Korean
      War. Exceptional panoramic view of Oahu from the crater rim.
      (8-5)

  =Queen Emma's Summer Palace=--Pali Highway. Classic white frame
      house was the Queen's summer retreat. Momentos and garden. (M-F,
      9-4, Sat. 9-noon, fee)

  =Alice Cooke Spaulding House= and Garden--2411 Makiki Hts. Dr.
      Exhibits of Asian treasures in this branch museum for the
      Honolulu Academy of Arts. The mansion's three acre garden
      combines Oriental, Western and Hawaiian influences. (T-S,
      1-4:30, fee except on Tuesdays.)

  =University of Hawaii=--Lower Manoa Valley. Lovely 300 acre campus.
      The intellectual center of Hawaii. Don't miss the University's
      famous =East-West Center=. A guided tour includes authentic
      Japanese garden and teak pavilion from Thailand. (Mon.-Thurs.
      1:30, free. Reservations 948-7702.)

  =Paradise Park=--3737 Manoa Road. Huge free flight aviary, flamingo
      pond, lush 15 acres of jungle gardens and an amazing collection
      of colorful parrots and macaws that do just about everything
      including play poker. (9:30-5:30, fee)

  =Dole Cannery=--650 Iwilei Road. Complete processing of pineapple in
      world's largest fruit cannery. Interesting half hour tours
      include a look at the magic machine that peels and cores 100
      pineapples in 60 seconds. Free samples of fruit and juice. (M-F,
      8:30, fee.) Seasonal. Call 536-3411.

  =Bishop Museum=--1355 Kalihi Street. World center for study of the
      Pacific. Primitive art, royal possessions, exhibits showing how
      the ancient Hawaiians lived, dressed and worshipped. (M-S, 9-5,
      Sun. 12-5, fee.) Ask about shows in nearby science center
      planetarium. A "Passport to Polynesia" may be purchased for
      entry into Museum, Science Center, Falls of Clyde and Heritage
      Theatre at King's Alley in Waikiki. It includes transportation
      between on double decker buses.

  =Pearl Harbor=--Cruises leave from Kewalo Basin at 9:30 and 1:30.
      Check with your hotel desk or any travel agent for reservations.

  =Arizona Memorial=--Pearl Harbor. The sunken battleship, the
      =Arizona=, with more than 1000 entombed sailors is mute
      testimony to the horrors of war. The navy operates free shuttle
      boats to the shrine from Halawa Landing. (9-3:30 except Monday.
      No barefeet, bathing suits or kids under 6 years.)

                [Illustration: Iolani Palace Bandstand]

                    [Illustration: Kawaiahao Church]

                     [Illustration: Falls of Clyde]

                      [Illustration: Chinatown]

                   [Illustration: Paradise Park]

                  [Illustration: Arizona Memorial]

                             [Illustration]

                   [Illustration: Iolani Palace]




                                WAIKIKI


Waikiki is where the action is--wave action and people action. This long
series of beautiful beaches is protected by an offshore reef a half mile
out. Conditions are ideal for surfing, outrigger canoe paddling and
catamaran sailing. The people come in waves that overflow the streets
and fill the high rises. The ebb and flow of humanity is a fascination
in itself.

Waikiki is a peninsula separated from Honolulu by the Ala Wai Canal and
bounded by the sea and Diamond Head. Long a favorite summering place for
Hawaiian royalty, it is today a monument to the jet age.

  =Royal Hawaiian Hotel=--A reminder of times past when the well-to-do
      came by ship and stayed a long time. The "pink palace" with its
      stately old world air and lush plantings is worth seeing and
      strolling through.

  =Rainbow Bazaar=--Hilton Hawaiian Village. An acre of international
      shopping outlets.

  =U.S. Army Museum=--Fort Derussy. A guided tour of military
      memorabilia of the army in Hawaii and the Pacific. (Tues.-Sat.
      10-2, free.)

  =Waikiki Historical Room=--Sheraton Waikiki Hotel, 2nd floor. Early
      pictures of Waikiki and famous people of the times. (Daily 9-5,
      free.)

  =Hemmeter Center=--Hyatt Regency Hotel. A fine selection of
      beautiful shops, boutiques, art galleries and restaurants.
      (Daily, 9 a.m.-11 p.m.)

  =Waikiki Shopping Plaza=--Kalakaua Ave. Nine floors of vertical
      shopping and dining.

  =International Market Place=--A complex of open air shops and
      restaurants overseen by huge banyan trees. Here you may watch
      craftsmen pounding tapa cloth, making shell leis and painting
      portraits.

  =King's Alley=--Kaiulani Ave. Gallery exhibits, live shows and a
      complex of shops. The daily 6:15 Changing of the Guard ceremony
      is followed by a free show of Hawaiian entertainment. If you
      purchase a "Passport to Polynesia" you'll have fully paid
      admission to King's Alley's Heritage Theatre, the Falls of Clyde
      maritime museum, the Bishop Museum and planetarium that includes
      transportation between each of these attractions.

  =Kapiolani Park=--A 220 acre park just below Diamond Head. Join the
      island residents who jog, picnic and sleep under the shower
      trees. You might want to view Queen Kapiolani's Rose Garden and
      take in a band concert if you're there on a Sunday afternoon.

  =Honolulu Zoo=--Kapiolani Park. Very popular with locals and
      visitors alike, the zoo is noted for its large Asian bird
      collection. On weekends artists display their work around the
      zoo fence. (9-5, free)

  =Waikiki Aquarium=--Kapiolani Park. A privileged look at a wide
      variety of sea life from Pacific waters including outdoor pools
      with turtles and seals children can throw fish to.

  =Diamond Head=--Named for its volcanic crystals once thought to be
      diamonds, this familiar landmark has seen a lot of changes take
      place at Waikiki. If you'd like to hike its flank for a Diamond
      Head view of things, call the Hawaiian National Guard for
      permission and directions.

                [Illustration: Waikiki and Diamond Head]

               [Illustration: International Market Place]

             [Illustration: Outrigger Hotel Pool, Waikiki]

                        [Illustration: Waikiki]

             [Illustration: Outrigger Hotel Beach, Waikiki]




                            OAHU'S EAST END
                    (Koko Head, Sea Life Park, etc.)


The drive around the east end of the island from Waikiki to Koko Head,
Sea Life Park, Waimanlo and back through Nuuanu Pali's tunnels is as
interesting a 35 mile tour as you're likely to take anywhere. The
scenery is dramatic--rocky coastline, wide sand beaches, transparent
water, and offshore islands with the rugged Koolau Mountains as a
backdrop.

  =Koko Head and Koko Crater=--Impressive peaks formed by Oahu's last
      eruption.

  =Hanauma Bay=--Watch for sign at the top of Koko Head. Idyllic
      beach, placid water, and coral reef make this a perfect place
      for snorkeling and swimming. Take a picnic. You won't want to
      hurry away.

  =Halona Blow Hole=--A natural sea geyser that spouts through a
      submerged lava tube. Temperamental when the waves aren't running
      right.

  =Koko Crater Botanic Garden=--Opposite Koko Head Sandy Beach. Two
      hundred acres of cactus, succulents, plumeria and other dry land
      plants.

  =Makapuu Beach Park=--Outstanding body surfing beach.

  =Sea Life Park=--Opposite Makapuu Beach. Prime attraction for all
      ages that includes a Hawaiian Reef Tank, Turtle Lagoon, Ocean
      Science Theatre, Whaler's Cove where whales and porpoises put on
      a memorable show and a Sea Lion Feeding Pool. A center for
      oceanographic research that is one of the world's finest sea
      life exhibits. (10-5 except Mondays, fee.)

  =Bellows Beach Park=--Ideal for a picnic lunch and a swim. (Open
      weekends only)

                    [Illustration: Halona Blow Hole]

                     [Illustration: Sea Life Park]

                     [Illustration: Sea Life Park]




                         OAHU'S WINDWARD COAST
      (Nuuanu Pali lookout, Polynesian Cultural Center, etc.)


  =Queen Emma's Summer Palace=--2913 Pali Hwy. Former home of Queen
      Emma, wife of Kamehameha IV. A furnished museum with rare
      belongings of Hawaiian royalty. (Daily. 9-4. Fee.)

  =Nuuanu Pali Lookout=--Reached by a spur road off the Pali Highway.
      Unforgettable view usually seen through blasts of unforgettable
      wind.

  =Haiku Gardens=--A mile off highway #83 on Haiku Road. Grass huts in
      luxuriant setting of lily ponds and bamboo groves. (Daily except
      Monday) Haiku Gardens Restaurant serves lunch and dinner.

  =Byodo-In Temple=--Mauka off highway #83. Replica of the most
      beautiful temple in Kyoto, Japan, the Byodo-In's majestic
      setting is a classical Japanese garden in a memorial park. (9-5,
      fee)

  =Kaneohe Bay=--Flourishing coral gardens can best be viewed from a
      glass bottom boat you can board at Heeia Kea pier. (Daily except
      Tuesdays, 11-3, fee)

  =Heeia Pond=--Past Kaneohe toward Kealohi Point. One of the few
      ancient fishponds still in use in the Hawaiian Islands.

  =Ulu Mau Village=--Heeia Point. Sixteenth century Hawaiian Village
      replica with displays of arts, crafts and dances. View of
      ancient Hawaiian Fishpond below. (10-3, fee)

  =Polynesian Cultural Center=--Laie. A living museum of six primitive
      South Sea Villages. Authentic Polynesian atmosphere complete
      with demonstrations of ancient crafts and dances. Don't miss the
      colorful pageant of the Long Canoes. Buffet lunch includes music
      and a look at native costumes from the past. Guided tours on
      foot, in outrigger canoes or on open trams. Polynesian revue
      each evening on open-air stage. (By reservation, 923-1861) The
      center is open daily except Sundays from 11 to 5:30. Free open
      tram tours from the center visit Laie, the Mormon Temple grounds
      and Brigham Young University.

  =Mormon Temple=--Laie. Largest Mormon house of worship outside
      mainland U.S. in a beautifully landscaped setting. Free tour
      from Polynesian Cultural Center.

  =Brigham Young University=--Laie. Half the students on this Mormon
      campus are from foreign islands, mostly Tonga, Fiji and Tahiti.
      Free tour from Polynesian Cultural Center.

  =Kahuku Sugar Mill=--Kahuku. A multi-media presentation depicting
      life at the and excellent guided tours explaining the sugar cane
      industry. (10-4:30, fee for tour)

               [Illustration: Kahuku Sugar Mill]

              [Illustration: Nuuanu Pali Lookout]

               [Illustration: Kahuku Sugar Mill]

           [Illustration: Polynesian Cultural Center]

           [Illustration: Polynesian Cultural Center]

                 [Illustration: Mormon Temple]

           [Illustration: Polynesian Cultural Center]




                      OAHU'S NORTH SHORE
            (Sunset Beach, Waimea Falls Park, etc.)


  =Sunset Beach=--along with many other beaches along the north shore
      has earned a reputation as the world's foremost surfing coast.
      Winter waves running as high as 30 feet are an awesome sight in
      themselves. When young people brave them on a slim board, it's
      nothing less than a spectacular sight. Surfing competition draws
      participants and spectators from around the world and larger
      contests are transmitted to international audiences by
      television.

  =Puu O Mahuka Heiau=--Take Pupukea Road off #83. The largest and
      best preserved temple on the island where human sacrifices were
      once offered.

  =Waimea Falls Park=--Fine place to swim and picnic. Walk to the
      falls or take the 3/4 mile tram ride. Enjoy the rare tropical
      plants growing in great profusion along the way. (10-5:30, fee)

  =Haleiwa Beach Park=--Grassy play areas, showers, fishing, camping,
      swimming and picnicking. An excellent beach for the beginning
      surfer when the waves are running two to five feet.

           [Illustration: Margo Oberg, World Champion Surfer]




                              CENTRAL OAHU
                  (Schofield Barracks, Wahiawa, etc.)


  =Pineapple Fields=--Largest pineapple growing area in the world.

  =Kukaniloko=--Place of the Sacred Birthstones. Before Wahiawa take
      the dirt road on the right through a pineapple field leading
      into a clump of eucalyptus trees. Here the royal women of Oahu
      came to give birth up until the reign of Kamehameha the Great.

  =Hongwanji Mission=--In Wahiawa, 1067 California Ave.

  =Wahiawa Botanical Garden=--1369 California Ave., Wahiawa. Nine
      acres of tropical plants and trees. (9-4, free)

  =Schofield Barracks and Museum=--Historical Military exhibits.
      (Wed.-Sun., 10-4)

  =Waipahu=--Plantation town where you may tour Oahu Sugar Mill in
      season.

  =Mokuleia polo matches=--Mokuleia. A popular island sport and fun to
      watch. March through mid-Sept. Sun. 2:30. Fee.

                [Illustration: Wahiawa Botanical Garden]




                              BEACHCOMBING


The best beaches for beachcombing and tidepool peeking are Ewa Beach
Park, Mokuleia Beach Park, Kaiaka Bay, Chun's Reef, Punaluu Beach Park,
Kaaawa Beach Park, Kualoa Point, Kaneohe Bay and Waialae Beach Park.

                             [Illustration]




                            Hawaiian Fruits

                       [Illustration: Jack Fruit]

                       [Illustration: Breadfruit]

                  [Illustration: Philippine Persimmon]

                         [Illustration: Banana]




                            Hawaiian Flowers

                     [Illustration: Passion Flower]

                     [Illustration: Coral Hibiscus]

                      [Illustration: Lehue Haole]

                      [Illustration: Torch Ginger]


                            Hawaiian Flowers

                        [Illustration: Hibiscus]

                     [Illustration: Red Jade Vine]

                         [Illustration: Orchid]

                       [Illustration: Water Lily]


                            Hawaiian Flowers

                  [Illustration: Bird of Paradise]

                 [Illustration: Orchid Tree Bloom]


                            Hawaiian Flowers

                 [Illustration: Night Blooming Cereus]

                             [Illustration]

                             [Illustration]

                             [Illustration]




                                SURFING


Waikiki's ideal surfing conditions--steady, dependable waves usually
from two to five feet--attracted Hawaiian royalty years ago. The surf
today draws enthusiasts from around the world. As a result, while the
waves are still excellent, especially for the novice surfer, there's
usually a crowd. For more maneuvering space and a change in scene,
surfers should head for one of Oahu's other great surfing beaches.

    Ala Moana Park
    Waialee-Kaunala Beach (experts only)
    Sunset Beach (experts)
    Ehukai Beach Park (experts)
    Waimea Bay Beach Park (experts)
    Chun's Reef
    Lanaikea Beach
    Haleiwa (excellent for beginners when surf is from 2 to 5 feet)
    Makua Beach (experts)
    Makaha Beach Park (experts)
    Maili Beach Park
    Ulehawa Beach Park

                             [Illustration]




                                BEACHES


From time to time strong currents, high surf and turbulent water affect
every beach on Oahu. Dangerous waves and rip tides are common during the
winter months especially on the north and west shores and at Koko Head
Beach Park and Makapuu Beach Park. The safest beaches are those under
supervision of a lifeguard.


                         GOOD SWIMMING BEACHES

    Ala Moana Park
    Waikiki Beach Center
    Prince Kuhio Beach Park
    Queen's Surf Beach Park
    Sans Souci Beach
    Hanauma Bay Beach Park
    Kaupo Beach Park
    Waimanalo Beach Park
    Bellows Beach Park
    Kailua Beach Park
    Kalama Beach
    Kaaawa Beach Park
    Kahana Bay Beach Park
    Punaluu Beach Park
    Ehukai Beach Park
    Waimea Bay Beach Park
    Makua Beach
    Keaau Beach Park
    Pokai Bay Beach Park
    Maili Beach Park
    Ulehawa Beach Park
    Nanakuli Beach Park
    Kahe Beach Park

                             [Illustration]




                      BODY SURFING AND SNORKELING


The best beaches for body surfing are Prince Kuhio Beach Park, Koko Head
Beach Park, Makapuu Beach Park, Bellows Beach Park, Laie Maloo and Keaau
Beach Park.


                        GOOD SNORKELING BEACHES

    Sans Souci Beach (Waikiki)
    Maunalua Beach Park
    Hanauma Bay Beach Park
    Kaaawa Beach Park
    Panaluu Beach Park
    Ehukai Beach Park (when calm)
    Sunset Beach (when calm)
    Pupukea Beach Park (when calm)
    Waimea Bay Beach Park (when calm)
    Chun's Reef
    Laniakea Beach
    Mokuleia Beach Park
    Makua Beach
    Keaau Beach Park
    Mauna Lahilahi Beach Park
    Pokai Bay Beach Park
    Nanakuli Beach Park
    Kahe Beach Park

                             [Illustration]

                      [Illustration: Hanauma Bay]




                        GLASS FLOAT BEACHCOMBING


Glass balls that once held Japanese fishing nets afloat are carried
great distances on ocean currents. Some find their way to Hawaiian
beaches where they are highly prized by beachcombers.

                             [Illustration]

                             [Illustration]




                                FISHING


How's the fishing? Stroll down to the International Market Place in
Waikiki and take a look at the marlin on display. There's your answer,
all 1800 pounds of it.

Fishing is a year-round pleasure and for saltwater enthusiasts there are
no seasonal restrictions, no limits and no licenses required. You can
also try your hand at surf casting, spin fishing, spear fishing and
fresh water fishing.

Honolulu boats fish for a mixed catch which may include mahimahi
(dolphin), Allison yellow fin tuna, giant bonefish, marlin, wahoo or
bonita. Kewalo Basin near Waikiki, the sport-fishing center for Oahu,
offers a fine selection of charter craft and experienced skippers.
There's usually lively action off Koko Head, in the open sea off Kaneohe
Bay or in Molokai Channel.

    A Happy Time Deep Sea Fishing Charters
    Outrigger East Hotel
    Honolulu, HI 96815
    (923-5448)

    Catherine S.
    Kewalo Basin
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (536-6577)

    Comet
    Kewalo Basin
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (533-3330)

    Coreene-C Sport Fishing Charters
    802 Punahou St.
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (536-7472)

    Ilima I Charter Fishing
    444 Hobron Lane
    Honolulu, HI 96815
    (947-3939)

    Magic Time Deep Sea Fishing Charters
    2335 Kalakaua Ave.
    Honolulu, HI 96815
    (922-2074)

    Tina Rei Sport Fishing
    426 Ward Ave.
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (521-8757)

    Haole Queen
    Box 267
    Haleiwa, HI 96712
    (637-5189)

    Inter-Island Sportfishing, Ltd.
    Kewalo Basin
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (533-3330)

    Island Charters
    Kewalo Basin
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (536-1555)

    Kamalii Kai Too
    85-794 Farrington Hwy.
    Honolulu, HI
    (696-7264)

    Ke-Au-Kai Sport Fishing
    Kewalo Basin
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (531-4966)

    Kamome Sport Fishing
    Kewalo Basin
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (536-5931)

    Kono Charters
    Kewalo Basin
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (531-0060)

    Sport Fishing-Hawaii
    Kewalo Basin
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (536-6577)

    Kamalii Kai
    85-794 Farrington Hwy.
    Waianae, HI 96792
    (696-7264)

    Pacific Trolling and Trapping
    404 Piikoi, Rm. 2288
    Honolulu, HI 96814
    (537-3597)

                             [Illustration]




                             FUN FOR KIDS
                          (DA KINE FOR KEIKIS)


  =Ala Moana Young People's Hula Show=--A delightful display of young
      talent every Sunday at 9:30 a.m. on the Lanai Stage at Ala Moana
      Center. (Free.)

  =Waikiki Beach=--Take off your shoes and walk the entire beach from
      one end to the other. It's all yours whether or not you're
      staying in a surfside hotel. Help paddle an outrigger canoe in
      through the surf, take a surfing lesson, snorkel, swim or sun.
      Or just sit and watch the world go by.

  =International Market Place=--Open air market with 80 different
      shops vying for your dollar, but you don't need money to enjoy
      the hubbub. Watch tapa-pounding and shell-lei making in the
      morning and portrait painters and cartoonists in the evening. Go
      ahead and gorge yourself with one of Farrell's unforgettable ice
    cream concoctions. (One specialty is so huge it takes several
    waiters to get it to the table.)

  =Porpoise Feeding=--Kahala Hilton lagoon. (Daily,
      10:30--12:30--2:30.)

  =The Zoo=--Kapiolani Park. The most visited attraction on Oahu.
      Tropical birds, monkeys, giraffes and an arkload of other
      animals. (Open 9-5, free)

  =Paki Park=--Behind the zoo. Kids can participate in a program of
      sports, hulas, arts and crafts. The 6 to 13 year-olds meet from
      3 to 5:30 and the teenagers from 6:30 to 9:30. Call first.
      737-0097.

  =Kodak Free Hula Show=--In Kapiolani Park next to the Waikiki Shell.
      Authentic hulas, poi-pounding and palm tree climbing. A bonanza
      for photographers of any age. Tues., Wed., Thurs. at 10 a.m.

  =Skateboard Park=--Aala Park between King and Beretania Streets.
      Need signed parental permission slip.

  =Hanauma Bay=--This idyllic tropical beach is a public park, just
      perfect for snorkeling, swimming and picnicking.

  =Sealife Park=--One of the world's finest marine exhibits. Watch the
      scuba diver hand feed giant turtles, sting rays and even the
      menacing moray eels in the Hawaiian Reef Tank. See the spinning
      dolphins and whales do their acrobatics and feed fish to the sea
      lions. (10-5 except Monday, fee unless you're under 7)

  =Paradise Park=--You'll be amazed at these exotic birds from the
      Amazon that can add and subtract, raise flags and ride bicycles.
      Kids can hold them or have them perch on a shoulder for
      photographs. Delightful jungle setting. (fee)

  =Manoa Falls=--A one mile hike at the end of Manoa Road behind
      Paradise Park. Fresh water swimming and picnicking. (Free).

  =Pearl Harbor=--One visit to the sunken battleship =Arizona= with
      more than 1000 entombed sailors is worth a thousand history
      lessons in the real meaning of war. (No bathing suits, barefeet
      or kids under 6.)

  =Pacific Submarine Museum=--At the submarine base, Pearl Harbor. A
      chance for kids to see and touch the insides of American and
      foreign subs. (Free, but stop for a pass at Nimitz Gate.
      Wed.-Sun. 9:30-5.)

  =Pineapple Cannery=--650 Iwilei Road. Worthwhile just to see the
      machinery that can turn 3.5 million unpeeled pineapples into
      cans in one day. On top of that, the juice is free. (8:30-3,
      Mon.-Fri. in season, call 536-3411)

  =Glider watching=--Daily at Dillingham airstrip. Rides in a three
      seater sailplane for a fee.

  =Polynesian Cultural Center=--Kids (and adults) are urged to
       participate in some of the crafts, songs and dances as they
       tour village replicas of Samoa, Tonga, old Hawaii, Tahiti, Fiji
       and Maori New Zealand. Watch weaving, carving and coconut
       husking and be sure to see the canoe pageant. Take more film
       than you think you can possibly use. (Monday-Saturday, 11 to
       5:30, fee)

  =Kahuku Sugar Mill=--A multi-media presentation depicting life
       at the mill and excellent guided tours explaining the sugar
       cane industry. The museum and complex of shops and eateries
       take a back seat to Wili Wili, the Disney-type character who
       enthralls the little ones with his antics. (10-4:30, fee for
       tour)


Large hotels have special youth programs featuring recreational and
craft activities. Youngsters are taught everything from the hula,
hat-weaving and coconut crafts to the Hawaiian alphabet song. Also,
there are snorkeling-swimming excursions to Hanauma Bay, trips to the
zoo, Sea Life Park, etc. Ask your social director for information.

                       [Illustration: Paradise Park]

                       [Illustration: Sand Sculpture]

                             [Illustration]




                                 TENNIS


County courts are under the jurisdiction of the Department of Parks and
Recreation, 3908 Paki Ave., Honolulu, HI 96815 (923-7927)


Public Courts

    Aiea Recreation Center
    99-350 Aiea Heights Dr.

    Aina Haina Playground
    827 Hind Dr.

    Ala Moana Park
    1201 Ala Moana

    Diamond Head Tennis Center
    3908 Paki Ave.

    Ewa Beach Community Park
    91-955 North Rd.

    Hahaione Valley Park
    663 Pepeekeo St.

    Halawa Park
    99-740 Apela St.

    Kaala Playground
    150 Kilani Ave.

    Kahala Field
    4495 Pahoa Ave.

    Kailua Recreation Center
    470 Kailua Road

    Kaimuki Recreation Center
    3521 Waialae Ave.

    Kalakaua Recreation Center
    721 Kalihi St.

    Kalihi Valley Center
    1911 Kam IV Rd.

    Kamamalu Playground
    1440 Emma St.

    Kaneohe District Park
    45-660 Keaahala Rd.

    Kanewai Playground
    2695 Dole St.

    Kapaolono Playground
    701-11th Ave.

    Kapiolani Tennis Courts
    2748 Kalakaua Ave.

    Keehi Lagoon Courts
    465 Lagoon Dr.

    Kilauea Playground
    4109 Kilauea Ave.

    Koko Head District Park
    423 Kaumakani St.

    Makiki District Park
    1539 Makiki

    Manoa Valley Field
    2721 Kaaipu St.

    Maunalani Playground
    4625 Sierra Dr.

    Maunawili Neighborhood Park
    Maunawili Valley Road

    Mililani Neighborhood Park
    95-245 Kaloapau St.

    Mililani Waena Park
    95-590 Naholoholo St.

    Niu Valley
    5510 Kanau St.

    Palolo Valley Rec. Center
    2077 Palolo

    Pearl City Kai
    1962 Lehua Ave.

    Pearl City Recreation Center
    485 Hoomaemae St.

    Pearl Ridge Community Park
    99-940 Moanalua Road

    Petrie Playground
    1039-20th Ave.

    Sunset Beach Neighborhood Park
    59-360 Kam Hwy.

    Wahiawa Recreation Center
    1139-A Kilani Ave.

    Waialua Recreation Center
    67-180 Goodale Rd.

    Waianae-Pililaau Field
    85-124 Plantation Rd.

    Waianae Regional Park
    85-471 Farrington Hwy.

    Waipahu Rec. Center
    94-990 Farrington Hwy.




                                  GOLF


    Ala Wai Golf Course
    Honolulu, HI 96815

    Bay View Golf Center
    Kaneohe, HI 96744

    Hawaii Country Club
    Wahiawa, HI 96759

    Hawaii Kai Championship
    Honolulu, HI 96825

    Hawaii Kai Executive
    Honolulu, HI 96825

    Kahuku Golf Course (9 holes)
    Kahuku, HI 96731

    Kuilima Resort & C.C.
    Kahuku, HI 96731

    Makaha C.C. East
    Waianae, HI 96792

    Makaha C.C. West
    Waianae, HI 96792

    Mililani Golf Club
    Mililani Town, HI 96789

    Moanalua Golf Club
    Honolulu, HI 96819 (9 holes)

    Olomana Golf Links
    Waimanalo, HI 96795

    Pali Golf Course
    Kaneohe, HI 96744

    Pearl Country Club
    Aiea, HI 96701

    Ted Makalena G.C.
    Waipahu, HI 96797

All are 18 holes unless otherwise indicated

                             [Illustration]




                                CAMPING


All state and federal park permits are free. Camping is allowed on
certain public beach parks for up to one week. Camping permits may be
obtained from the Department of Parks and Recreation, Honolulu Municipal
Building, Honolulu, HI 96813 (8-4 on Monday through Friday). Motorhome
permits are also issued by the Parks department. (523-4525)

Mountain camping is available at two state parks: Keaiwea Heiau State
Park and Waahila Ridge State Recreation Area. Be sure to obtain permit.
(free)

=The following beach parks allow camping=:

    Makapuu Beach Park
    Kaiona Beach Park
    Waimanalo Beach Park
    Bellows (weekends and holidays only)
    Kaaawa Beach Park
    Swanzy Beach Park
    Kehana Bay Beach Park
    Punaluu Beach Park
    Hauula Beach Park
    Haleiwa Beach Park
    Mokuleia Beach Park
    Keaau Beach Park
    Lualualei Beach Park
    Nanakuli Beach Park
    Kahe Beach Park

                             [Illustration]




                                 HIKING


The State Forestry Division maintains about two dozen trails on Oahu.
Maps showing these trails may be obtained from them at 1179 Punchbowl
St. in Honolulu.

The Hawaiian Trail and Mountain Club conducts weekly hikes (non-member
fee is 25¢). For information call 247-3922 or 734-5515 during business
hours or write to the club at P. O. Box 2238, Honolulu, HI 96804.

The Hawaii chapter of the Sierra Club takes one day hikes monthly on
Oahu (non-members are welcome) and can be contacted c/o the Bishop
Museum, P. O. Box 6037, Honolulu, HI 96818.

                             [Illustration]




                                WEATHER


Oahu weather is beautifully balmy, as near to perfection as you're
likely to get on this globe. Temperatures are generally in the seventies
in the winter; in the summer they creep up into the eighties. The
average range in Honolulu varies only seven degrees between August, the
hottest part of the year, and January, the coolest time. The difference
between day and night peaks is about 12 degrees. At Waikiki the ocean
fluctuates narrowly between 75 and 82. In other words, if it's summer
you want, you've come to the right place.

The island is air conditioned by northeasterly trade winds which blow
almost all the time and usher in an occasional shower. During spring and
summer these rains are few and come mostly at night. In winter the
trades are sometimes replaced by Kona winds coming up from the south
with sticky or stormy weather in tow. But Kona winds are infrequent and
rarely last more than a couple days.

Rainfall varies greatly according to local conditions. It's wetter to
the windward of the mountains and fairly dry on the leeward coast. The
average rainfall in Waikiki is about 20 to 25 inches per year, slightly
more in Honolulu.

                             [Illustration]




                               OAHU'S PAST


The volcanic cataclysms that pushed Oahu through the surface of the
Pacific four to six million years ago originated in a fault in the
earth's crust at the bottom of the ocean. Complete with rumbling,
sputtering and spectacular fireworks, it was a dramatic premiere
performance. Today this gentle island, green and golden, belies its
violent birth. A millennium of rain, sunshine, waves and trade winds have
sculpted Oahu into a tropical jewel of lush valleys, mountains and
curved sandy beaches.

The Polynesians were the first to successfully sail the vast reaches of
the uncharted Pacific to land in Hawaii. They dragged their huge
double-hulled canoes ashore more than 1000 years ago. The original
inhabitants of Oahu from the Marquesas Islands were followed by several
waves of Tahitian immigrants.

Their primitive way of life came to an end with the arrival of Captain
Cook in 1778. By the middle of the 19th century Honolulu Harbor had
become a key Pacific port for whalers, sandalwood and fur traders. In
1850 the Hawaiian Royal Court moved permanently to Honolulu which has
been the seat of government for monarchy, republic, territory and state.

Immigrants came to Hawaii's tropical shores in continuing waves. New
England missionaries made their first hazardous trip around Cape Horn in
1820 bringing new concepts of religion, agriculture, commerce and
democratic government. As the native population dwindled due to western
diseases, laborers were needed to work the fields for the rapidly
growing sugar industry. Chinese, Japanese and Filipino immigrants
followed by Koreans, Portuguese and Puerto Ricans added new languages
and cultures to the island population.

In 1893 a provisional government was set up to replace the monarchy and
one year later the Republic of Hawaii was founded. The islands were
annexed by the U.S. in 1898 and made a territory in 1900. In 1959 Hawaii
first flew the stars and stripes as a full-fledged state.

Today Oahu welcomes an astounding number of visitors to share its exotic
scenery, eternal summer climate and warm aloha spirit.

                             [Illustration]




                          SUGAR AND PINEAPPLE


People the world over have enjoyed the sweet and succulent products the
Hawaiian Islands are famous for--sugar and pineapple. These are the two
most important agricultural industries in the archipelago. Pineapple can
grow at higher elevations and needs less water than sugar cane so the
crops don't compete for the same lands. Because Hawaii must import most
essentials from the U.S. mainland, the export of sugar and pineapple is
an important factor in the state's balance of trade. Also, with the
world running low on verdant spaces, sugar and pineapple are keeping
Oahu green.


                                 SUGAR

Sugar cane came to the islands in the hulls of the great canoes those
early Polynesians sailed across the Pacific. Hawaiians planted it as a
windbreak around their homes and broke off sections to chew when they
traveled.

The first sugar plantation in Hawaii was started in Manoa Valley on Oahu
in 1825 and the first export recorded was two tons in 1837. The Royal
Hawaiian Agricultural Society was instrumental in bringing the initial
shipment of Chinese laborers to work the fields in 1852. This was the
beginning of waves of immigrant workers who have contributed a wealth of
cultural diversity to Hawaii.

Cane on Oahu takes about two years to mature. The industry is highly
mechanized and has virtually eliminated hand labor. Just before harvest,
whole fields of cane are deliberately set on fire. This destroys
unwanted leaves and other trash and does not affect the sugar content.

Hawaii's sugar industry is recognized as the world's leader in sugar
technology and production and its workers are among the highest paid
full-time agricultural workers in the world.

               [Illustration: Sugar Cane Fields Burning]




                               PINEAPPLE


Pineapple was first introduced to the islands by a counselor to King
Kamehameha the Great in 1813. Today's industry got its greatest impetus
from Captain John Kidwell, an English horticulturist who searched the
world for a pineapple variety that would be most suitable to Hawaii. The
Jamaican variety known as the Smooth Cayenne which he introduced is
still the predominant strain grown in Hawaii.

In 1899 a young New Englander, James B. Dole, built a cannery next to
pineapple growing on his own lands in Wahiawa on Oahu. The first year's
output in 1903 was 1800 cases. Today the Dole company packs this amount
in just a few minutes.

Pineapple takes nearly two years of careful tending before it matures.
Then each low-growing plant yields only one fruit. A year later the same
plant will produce one or two more pineapples; then the whole process
must be repeated.

At harvest time, pickers move through the fields placing the fruits on
long-armed conveyors, a process which at the peak of the season
continues on into the night with the help of lighted booms.

Only those who have tasted a field-ripened Hawaiian pineapple know what
real pineapple is all about. The airport is full of enlightened visitors
who are taking cartons of these succulent fruits home with them.

  [Illustration: Hawaii produces 45% of the total world production of
                              pineapple.]

                             [Illustration]




                          [Illustration: OAHU]




                        [Illustration: WAIKIKI]


Major hotels

    1 Ala Moana
    2 Aloha Surf
    3 Ambassador
    4 Breakers
    5 Cinerama Edgewater
    6 Cinerama Reef
    7 Cinerama Reef Towers
    8 Coral Reef
    9 Coral Seas
    10 Hale Koa
    11 Halekulani
    12 Hawaii Dynasty
    13 Hawaiian Regent
    14 Hilton Hawaiian Village
    15 Holiday Inn
    16 Holiday Inn
    17 Holiday Isle
    18 Hyatt Regency Waikiki
    19 Ilikai
    20 Ilima
    21 Imperial Hawaii
    22 Kaimana Beach
    23 Marine Surf
    24 Miramar
    25 Moana
    26 Outrigger
    27 Outrigger East
    28 Outrigger Surf
    29 Outrigger West
    30 Pacific Beach
    31 Pagoda
    32 Park Shore
    33 Princess Kaiulani
    34 Queen Kapiolani
    35 Reef Lanais
    36 Royal Hawaiian
    37 Sand Villa
    38 Sheraton Waikiki
    39 Surfrider
    40 Travelodge
    41 Waikiki Beachcomber
    42 Waikiki Circle
    43 Waikiki Gateway
    44 Waikiki Grand
    45 Waikiki Marina
    46 Waikiki Resort
    47 Waikiki Surf
    48 Waikiki Surf East
    49 Waikiki Surf West
    50 Waikiki Village
    51 Waikikian




                        [Illustration: HONOLULU]


Points of interest

    1 King Kamehameha Statue
    2 Iolani Palace
    3 Iolani Barracks
    4 State Capitol Building
    5 Hawaii State Library
    6 Honolulu Hale (City Hall)
    7 Mission Homes
    8 Kawaiahao Church
    9 Honolulu Academy of Arts
    10 Neal Blaisdell Center
    11 Aloha Tower
    12 Falls of Clyde
    13 Chinatown
    14 Cultural Plaza
    15 Kwan Yin Temple
    16 Foster Botanic Garden
    17 National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific
    18 Queen Emma's Summer Palace
    19 Alice Cooke Spaulding House
    20 University of Hawaii
    21 East-West Center
    22 Paradise Park
    23 Waioli Tea Room
    24 Dole Cannery
    25 Bishop Museum




                      [Illustration: North Shore]

                        [Illustration: East End]




                     [Illustration: Windward Oahu]




                     [Illustration: Waianae Coast]




                      [Illustration: Central Oahu]




Transcriber Notes:

Text in bold is enclosed by equal signs (=bold=).

Throughout the book, the punctuation of the abbreviations of Sun.
through Sat., were changed to ensure a period after each of those
abbreviations.

On page 8, "acupunture" was replaced with "acupuncture".

On page 22, "Tempermental" was replaced with "Temperamental".

On page 25, "of highway" was replaced with "off highway".

On page 42, a heading "GLASS FLOAT BEACHCOMBING" was added to match the
Table of Contents.

On page 44, "hubub" was replaced with "hubbub", a period was added after
"cartoonists in the evening", and "the machinery than" was replaced with
"the machinery that".

On page 52, "millenium" was replaced with "millennium".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Oahu Traveler's guide, by 
Bill Gleasner and Diana Gleasner

